---
title: A Quick Introduction to Differential Geometry 3
date: 2022-12-30 11:20:00 +0900
categories: [Mathematics, Differential Geometry]
tags: [Differential Geometry, Riemannian Manifold, Volume Form, Hodge Star]
pin: false
math: true
author: yeomjy
---

> This post series is to give a short introduction about basic notions of differential geometry such as smooth manifold, differential form, and riemannian manifold. I tried to introduce every notion as a natural generalization of calculus and undergraduate differential geometry about curves and surfaces.
>
> This post will be updated irregularly to correct error, add more detail, explanation, or illustration.
>
> Here is the list of this post series.
>
> 1. [A Quick Introduction to Differential Geometry 1](/blog/posts/diff-geo-1)
> 2. [A Quick Introduction to Differential Geometry 2](/blog/posts/diff-geo-2)
> 3. [A Quick Introduction to Differential Geometry 3](/blog/posts/diff-geo-3) (This post)
{: .prompt-tip}

# A Quick Introduction to Riemannian Manifold

## Riemannian Manifold

___
**Definition (Riemannian Manifold).**

___

A **Riemannian manifold** $M$ is a smooth manifold equipped smooth $(0,2)$-tensor field(bilinear form) $\renewcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}g_p : T_p M \times T_p M \rightarrow \R$ such that

$$
    \begin{align}
        &g_p(X, Y) = g_p(Y, X) & \textrm{(Symmetric)} \\
        &&\\
        &g_p(X, X) \geq 0 \textrm{ and } g_p(X,X) = 0 \Longleftrightarrow X = 0 & \textrm{(Positive definite)}
    \end{align}
$$

$g_p$ is called a **Riemannian metric**. In fact, it is a smooth assignment of *inner product* for each $T_p M$.  
Therefore, we also write $g_p(X,Y)=\left<X, Y\right>_p$

___

With the Riemannian metric, we can define a 'orthonormal' frame.

___
**Definition (Riemannian Orthonormal Frame).**

___

A **Riemannian Orthonormal Frame** is a local frame which satisfies

$$
\newcommand{\ip}[1]{\left< #1 \right>}
    g_p (X_i(p), X_j(p)) = \ip{X_i(p), X_j(p)}  = \delta_{ij}
$$

___

# Hodge Star and Operators for Differential Form

## Volume Form

### Orientation via differential form

We have seen that

$$
    d\tilde{x}_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge d\tilde{x}_n = \det \left(\frac{\partial \tilde{x}_j}{\partial x_i}\right) dx_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_n
$$

holds for two local coordinate system $(x_1,\cdots, x_n), \; (\tilde{x}_1, \cdots, \tilde{x}_n)$.

Therefore, we can also define orientability in terms of differential form.

___

**Theorem (Orientation via nonvanishing $n$-form).**

___

$M$ is orientable if and only if there exists a $n$-form $\omega$ such that $\omega \neq 0$ everywhere.

___

### Volume Form

___

**Definition (Volume Form).**

___

A **volume form** is a $n$-form on $n$-manifold $M$ is a nonvanishing form. we write volume form as $\textrm{vol}_n$, or $dV$.

___

Existence of the volume form is equivalent to orientability.

For Riemannian manifold, due to the Riemannian metric, we can define a 'natural' volume form.

___
**Definition (Riemannian Volume Form).**

___

A **Riemannian volume form** is a $n$-form such that $\omega(E_1, \cdots, E_n) = 1$ for every orthonormal frame $E=(E_1,\cdots, E_n)$.

Let $\varepsilon_i$ be a coframe(dual) of $E_i$, then we can write

$$
    \textrm{vol}_n = \varepsilon_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge \varepsilon_n
$$

___

___
**Proposition.**

___

For a local coordinate system $(U, x)$,

$$
    \textrm{vol}_n = \sqrt{|\det (g_{ij})|} dx_{1}\wedge \cdots \wedge dx_n
$$

where $g_{ij}$ is local coordinate representation of the Riemannian metric.

**proof**.

Let us represent local coordinate basis as orthonormal frame.

$$
    \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} = \sum_{j} A_{ij} E_j
$$

Then,

$$
\newcommand{\pdiv}[1]{\frac{\partial}{\partial x_{#1}}}
    g_{ij} = \ip{\pdiv{i}, \pdiv{j}}_p = \sum_{k, l} A_{ik}A_{jl} \ip{E_k, E_j}_p =\sum_{k} A_{ik}A_{jk} = (AA^T)_{ij}
$$

Then,

$$
    \newcommand{\vol}{\textrm{vol}}
    \vol_n \left(\pdiv{1},\cdots, \pdiv{n}\right) = \varepsilon_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge \varepsilon_n \left(\pdiv{1}, \cdots, \pdiv{n}\right) = \det(A_{ij})
$$

Finally, $\det (g_{ij}) = \det(AA^T) = (\det A)^2$

Therefore,

$$
    \vol_n = \det A dx_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_n = \sqrt{|\det(g_{ij})|} dx_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_n
$$

___

## Hodge Star

___
**Definition (Hodge Star).**

___

Since we represented $k$-form as

$$
    \omega = \sum_{i_1 < \cdots < i_{k}} \omega_{i_1, \cdots, i_k} dx_{i_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_{i_k} \in \Lambda^{k}(V)
$$

$\dim \Lambda^{k}(V) = \binom{n}{k} = \binom{n}{n-k} = \dim\Lambda^{n-k}(V) $.

Therefore, we can define a natural isomorphism  $\star:\Lambda^{k}(V)\rightarrow\Lambda^{n-k}(V)$ by

$$
    \star(dx_{i_1} \wedge \cdots dx_{i_k}) = dx_{j_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_{j_{n-k}}
$$

where $(i_1,\cdots, i_k, j_1, \cdots, j_{n-k})$ is a even permutation of $(1, \cdots, n)$.

___

The Riemannian volume form can be expressed by a hodge star, $\vol_n=\star (1)$, where the
1 is $f: M \rightarrow \R$ such that $f(p) = 1$ everywhere.

# References

Do Carmo, M. P. *Differential Forms and Applications*. Springer, 1998.  
Lee, J. M. *Introduction to Topological Manifolds*. Springer, 2010.  
Lee, J. M. *Introduction to Smooth Manifolds*, Springer, 2012.  
McInerney, A. *First Steps in Differential Geometry*. Springer, 2013.  
Spivak, M. *Calculus on manifolds: a modern approach to classical theorems of advanced calculus*. CRC press, 2018.
